>> James Halliday: I have been
using this a bit already but
there is this concept of
anchoring the regular expression.
So if you want the regex engine,
it's walking along your string
like character by character.
If you want it to start at
the beginning you use a caret.
This is, unfortunately caret is also
used for character class negations but
this is a different one, that is not
at the start of a character class.
So you can anchor at
the beginning with a caret and
anchor at the end with a dollar sign.
And later in Vim we will learn that these
conventions are actually rather more
widespread than it might seem.
So, why don't we play around
with that a little bit,
so may be I'll stick to node here.
So suppose we have a sting
like cool beans and we want
to replace beans but only if it's like the
start of the word, we wanna capitalize it.
So that's not gonna match normally, right?
Unless we start the string out that way,
then it matches.
Same thing with dollar sign,
but at the end.
So we had it the first way,
the dollar sign matches.
Makes sense, okay.
There's also similar in spirit
to how character classes work,
how it kind of enumerates
a bunch of options.
We have this notion of groups, both
captured groups and noncaptured groups.
This is a way of telling the engine like
either one of these patterns is valid.
So, but these patterns can
be in multiple characters,
not just a single character
like with the character class.
So if we have something like,
say we have beep and boop and
we want to match b and
then either ee or oo.
>> James Halliday: We can do that.
>> James Halliday: Another way of writing
this might be you could do this and
then these are quantifier to specify
two of them be the same thing.
So, capture groups
are a little bit special.
So, capture groups can also
be used to match content.
So if I wanted, so suppose I had,
if we go back to that example
earlier with the brackets, so
suppose that this is our string.
And now we want to match everything
that is inside of the brackets.
How can we do that?
Capture group, so I'll put that.
That's how we had it earlier, right?
So you can put that middle
part in parentheses.
This tells the regex engine
to save that text and
make it available and so
we can use .exec with the string.
And now, the match object that we get has
the contents that were captured as m[1],
which is the part that is inside of here.
Everyone of these capture groups that you
specify in your regular expression is
going to be available
with an integer index.
So if we have two of them, the second
one would be m with square brackets,
2, and it goes one, by one, by one.
You can also use these
in your replacement.
I'll show you an example in JavaScript,
and also an example in sed.
So for example,
if we have the string cool <beans>
.replace that, maybe globally sure,
you can refer to this
capture group by doing $1.
So maybe we wanna change angle
brackets to quotes, for example.
So I can put quotes in there, and
then the replacement engine is gonna
substitute $1 for whatever I put
in the first capture group there,
which is now cool beans
with quotes around it zzz.
>> James Halliday: Maybe we want to also
capture the next word as the second group.
So you can put $2 in there as well,
and that is also captured.
>> James Halliday: There's also a
non-capture groups, so sometimes you need
the, like if you need to use the OR
character, inside of a group.
For example, if we want to
match either angle brackets or
maybe curly brackets, we can do that.
If I'd have done that with,
let's do it like this.
>> James Halliday: So if we have this
first pattern, which is gonna be angle
brackets, and then our second pattern
maybe will be the double quotes, right?
So we'll just do the same kind of thing.
It would be good if we could maybe not
match the first bit into a pattern.
You can do that by specifying
a question mark colon around, and
that just basically means
don't capture this pattern.
Just a nice little thing
sometimes if need,
if you have to add a bit that
is a branch into your regex.
But not something that you
have to use all the time.
We can also do capture groups in sed,
there's a few ways,
you can use the $ syntax or you can
also use a / in front of the number.
So if we go back to sed,
>> James Halliday: And
we do sed -E and then do this replacement.
>> James Halliday: If we want to just get
rid of the angle brackets, for example.
Whoops.
All right, and you've gotta do the parens
around it if you want it to work.
There we go.
We could also, like,
put around like tildes or
something,around the quoted bit,
that works.
Dollar sign I guess doesn't work in
sed but it does work in JavaScript.
Related to this is the idea
of back references.
So, you can actually use a capture
group that you've captured in your
regex inside of the regex itself, so
it's still inside of the pattern.
For example a good use case is this if
you wanna search for all words that
are kinda of repeated twice, like
the the or something, we can do the regex.
So the the whatever cats
dogs dogs etcetera.
We can now search for all words that are,
immediately after the word
is the same word,
which is what this means
because \1 refers to
the first capture group
that was just matched.
And we can replace that
with the first word again.
So this regex right here,
this substitution,
will replace all of the repeated words.
So it should replace the the with
just a single the and
it should replace dogs dogs with
a single dogs, did it do it?
All right you have to do it in -E mode,
of course.
There we go, so that's what we expect.
Back references also works in node,
so we can take this example and
I'll just show you how to do
that in JavaScript really quick.
>> James Halliday: Do just w+ \1/,
and then you have to use $1, but
otherwise I think they
ought to be the same.
Yeah, there we go.
>> James Halliday: Right, and -1 in
JavaScript land means something else, so
you have to use dollar sign.
>> James Halliday: Okay, that should be
a lot for people to play around with.
So there is more that I'm gonna get
to in a bit but just play around.
If you have any questions,
if you're getting stuck you can
either use the command line,
you can use something like the node repo.
You can try out filtering
files with grep to search for
patterns, so you can try using sed.
There's also some handy flags for sed like
you can use -i which does an in place
substitution, so if you wanna modify
a file this a pretty nifty trick.
So suppose in this file hello.txt we want
to modify it to replace the word, maybe
we'll replace the word
cool with the capital,
maybe the word cool spelled with a k,
because that's really tacky.
So if we do cool with be also 0s and
1, that's extremely tacky -i.
And now instead of printing
out to standard out,
sed will go ahead and
update that file first in place.
And if I open it again, yep,
we can see that the file was modified.
>> James Halliday: And,
that's just pretty handy
if you have a file that has a bunch of
stuff that you want to fix really quick.
Just, you can do it all
in one place like that,